# starter-go

A starter Go language project

## Introduction

Go is not a difficult language to learn, compared to other options. The syntaxis was specifically designed to _take things out_ so you have a minimal set of tools that prevent developers to overengineer programs. And it doesn't offer a ton out-of-the-box libraries you are required to wrap your code around.

But many of the things that makes a great Go program are beyond its syntaxis and libraries, and more on _how it is supposed to be used_.

I created this repo for my own sake to take notes on this recommendations, common best practices, important third party libraries, and starting codebase.

## Setting up your development environment

### Install Go

The official _Go_ website [https://go.dev/doc/install](https://go.dev/doc/install) provides steps to install required Go binaries and files, for Linux, Mac or Windows.

It will also instruct you to add the Go binaries directory to your path, something like this on Linux

```bash
export PATH=$PATH:/usr/local/go/bin
```

Then you can verify the installation worked by running:

```bash
go version
```

If you are using go in WSL2 Linux inside Windows, it may be useful to install it also on the Windows part.

### Set GOPATH for local user

On Linux when you want to gobally install a Go binary using `go install` it will try to use `/usr/local/go/bin/` directory to create binaries and `/usr/local/go/pkg/` to cache non-main packages. But it will fail as it requires root to write there. Instead of messing up with `sudo`, let's create a directory local to the user for this:

```bash
mkdir -p $HOME/go/bin
```
Modify your configuration to set the `GOPATH` variable and path:

```bash
export GOPATH=/usr/local/go
export PATH=$PATH:/usr/local/go/bin:$HOME/go/bin
```

This will be set once for the current user. For different Go projects under the same use, we will use _Go modules_.

### Is it neccesary to set GO111MODULE?

Not any more, it's the default setting.

Some instructions may include specifics steps for Go version <1.16 that define that variable temporarily, like:

```bash
GO111MODULE=on go get github.com/golang/mock/mockgen@v1.6.0
```

If you use a recent version of Go it is not neccesary.

### IDEs and code editors

Some popular options to edit Go code are:

* [Goland](https://www.jetbrains.com/go/buy/#commercial) (not free)
* [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)
  * [Go](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=golang.Go) extension
* [vim](https://danielmiessler.com/study/vim/)
  * [vim-go](https://github.com/fatih/vim-go) plugin

The Go extension for VS Code will install additional Go binaries when it detects a Go program, and will use our local `GOPATH` if configured correctly. So you have to start VS Code from a terminal or environment where your configuration is set up as explained before.

## Creating a Go program

### First step and Go modules.

When starting a program you should use _Go modules_. It was an optional feature added some time ago, but now is the standard for handling and locating dependencies. [Learn more about Go modules here](https://go.dev/doc/tutorial/create-module).

If for example you are creating a program that will be commited to a git repository located at [github.com/vicenteherrera/starter-go](github.com/vicenteherrera/starter-go) you should initialize this directory using:

```bash
# (You don't really need to do this on this repo, it has already been executed)
go mod init github.com/vicenteherrera/starter-go
```

This will create a `go.mod` file defining that name and go version.

Later on other projects can use that specification to locate and download that module code as a dependency if it's a library. But you also need to do it for the main project to initialize using other modules that you will import.

The alternative to this is installing all dependencies for a Go project globally or on a `GOPATH` variable defined directory that you change for each project specified directory, which takes time and prune to errors.

### Adding dependencies

Whenever you add a dependency using `import`, you can track those running from the command line:

```bash
go mod tidy
```

If you create a dependency that is not uploaded to GitHub or other online location, and uses a naming like `example.org/mydep`, you can specify the local directory to fetch it from with:

```bash
go mod edit -replace example.com/mydep=../path-to-mydep
```

### Compiling from the command line

Just run:

```bash
go build cmd/
```

And a new binary with the same name as your project's directory will appear in it.

## General practices

### Directory structure

For a binary project the recommended directory structure is this:

* build
  * `Dockerfile`
* cmd
  * `starter-go` (name of your binary/project)
* docs
* pkg
  * packagename (short names preferred)
    * `file_name.go`
    * `file_name_test.go`
    * mocks
      * `file_name.go` (code generated by MockGen)

### Compiling from the command line

Just run:

```bash
go build cmd/
```

And a new binary with the same name as your project's directory will appear in it.

## Developing in Go

### Parsing command line parameters

To parse command line parameters as configurable options to your Go program and display help, use the builtin Go library `flag`.

You can find a [nice tutorial at "Go by example"](https://gobyexample.com/command-line-flags) as well as see how it is used in `cmd/starter-go/main.go` in this repository.







